[music]
Hi everybody, it's Joe Hudson and
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore living the life you
want with enjoyment and ease. And today
we have a very special guest. I'll be
interviewing uh Johannes Longruff who is
the CEO of ONA and formerly Gipod. And
he has been a client with me for two and
a half three years. And he's going to
talk about a couple things. one, how the
work that we do at AOA, how it works
inside of a company and how it's been
very effective at having him get from 0
to 60 quadruple revenue. But we're also
going to talk about how to create a
[snorts] culture that has to change at
the pace of AI. And so we're going to
explore how that happens. And welcome,
Johannes.
>> Thank you. I'm really great to be here.
So tell me a little bit about the like
what the market's doing right now. Like
how how
>> my experience of it is nobody really
understands everything that's happening
in AI. Nobody really understands
everything that's happening in coding
anymore. No matter who you are
>> and the market is different every six
months,
>> every week [laughter]
>> six months it would be nice,
>> right? So, so, so tell me what it's like
to be in that market. Tell me what it's
like
>> to lead a team
>> that is that is constantly seeing the
rug pulled from underneath them.
>> Yeah. So, I think what happens to
software engineering right now is what
will happen to all other industries
downstream um as AI is maturing and the
main reason is that um the frontier
frontier labs picked coding as the
number one use case. So because of that
I think coding is um like impacted first
right that by the way that understanding
of that market and also laying that out
towards the company really helped rally
the whole company behind it because
everybody sees the velocity
>> of change.
>> Now exponentials are real. So this is I
think the first time that I feel
exponentials like [laughter]
viscerally in my body. Yeah. Because
every week you know there are new models
out there. I think like two weeks ago
codecs from OpenAI coding model GP5
codecs from them grew within a week
within a week in terms of use usage 3x.
Now, literally today, as you're
recording this episode, um, Anthropic
released like claw 4.5, which is again
now state-of-the-art in terms of coding.
So, you have cycles that are happening
on an almost like weekly basis right
now. And I think I think a lot a lot a
lot about that because what it does
naturally is there is a certain level of
overwhelm, of anxiety, of stress. You
know, people in the valley tell you to
work now 96 and 96 means working from
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 6 um six days a
week. So, there's a lot of intensity in
the market right now and a lot of
uncertainty as well.
And I think fundamentally a couple of
the core
principles of great decision- making are
actually not changing. And I think it's
very important both as a culture but
also like for myself for my own you know
like sanity and decision-m quality to
come back to those things and that is um
emotional clarity like cycling actually
very fast through that overwhelm and
also seeing the opportunity in it
because there is um
intensity helps you to not overthink.
So intensity helps you to keep going,
keep evolving, keep doing and not like
you know being stuck in something. I
remember that I mean all the AOA courses
in a way are structured like that. When
we did the the connection course um the
first time with the team so the
leadership team the main feedback was
for people is like that that's too fast.
Okay. I want I I want to keep on in that
specific conversation. I'm not done yet.
And I think um you always replied this
is on purpose because we want to people
we want people to understand that they
can move through things and that
ultimately emotions can cycle very very
quickly through your system.
>> So I think getting to that like
emotional clarity and cycling fast
through your emotions is becoming a
superpower when the rate of change is um
is exponential.
>> Yeah. And I think that is like what we
internally try to always I mean of
course we're never perfect. I definitely
also have have FOMO you know at some at
some at some days um if you see the um
yeah revenue from anthropic going I
don't know to like five billion you know
within within a couple of months. Um but
I think it's really understanding you
know those those basics and then playing
your own game like do not play somebody
else's game. I think that is so
important in the market. So understand
where your strengths how you fit in how
you also differentiate from both a
product perspective and then play
towards that.
>> Yeah. So how do you so that's your
overwhelm but you have a team of people
>> they must get overwhelmed. How do you as
a team stop the inefficiency of
overwhelm
>> or work with the inefficiency of
overwhelm?
>> I mean, one thing I [sighs]
um
the thing I recognized is when I'm
overwhelmed, the team is overwhelmed.
So, it always starts with leadership and
that applies similarly to my leadership
team. So, if they're overwhelmed, their
team will be overwhelmed as well. And um
then also the team understands each
individually
um that if they project the overwhelm
towards their team, it impacts that it
impacts that team.
>> How do you marry that with transparency?
Because if you're actually overwhelmed,
>> okay, I'm not going to put it out there,
but then I would be non-transparent like
how do you how do you marry those
things? So over the last over the last
um
months we've we've um as a leadership
team done the experiment with the AOA
team to actually be one of the council
groups. So council is a program of AOA
that is a lot about
>> building high trust relationships within
um a certain group and learning to
embrace also conflict, adding adding
data points, learning and understanding
more about yourself ultimately.
>> Um and that has been extremely helpful
specifically within within leadership.
So um to the extent that I mean we have
those monthly sessions where we have a
very structured process to bring up
those things and talk about them.
>> Yeah.
>> But we've also taken those concepts and
now um have started um what we call like
mini councils. So if there is like
smaller conflict between between um
functions or overwhelm
um we set up those mini council groups
where we like talk about these things
and bring them up.
>> Yeah. So just for people outside so one
of the things that we do in council is
just really teach people to have to be
in a conversation that's deeply present
that's deeply open deeply in view and
then give you some tools on how to do
that with a group.
>> Yeah. And so that you can have these
very deep and meaningful conversations.
And it's interesting what you're saying
because one of the things that I noticed
with companies that are constantly in
overwhelm is their nervous system never
slows down enough. They're they don't
ever slow down enough to speed up.
Right? There's that great quote that I
always get wrong, but it's from the US
Marines and it's slow is steady. Steady
is fast.
And like taking that time to slow down
and really especially when it's when
it's like high tension areas or if
there's overwhelm to really slow down
really speeds you up in the long term.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and so so I don't have I have no idea
about the mini council. So like like
what are you doing there? That sounds
really cool.
>> I mean it's ultimately literally using a
lot of the same structure and
principles. So um I mean starts with
projection people like um talk about you
know their their triggers what they are
um
>> annoyed by you know by the other group
um and bring those bring those things
up.
>> That's cool. So you're basically just
bringing those tools into the conflict
be so that people can get present.
>> Yeah.
>> So that's something that you've just
added recently the council that's maybe
what six months old or something like
that.
>> Yeah.
>> And what are you seeing happening there?
like what's what's that doing for your
trust, your transparency
for running into the difficulty? What's
it doing for business?
>> As a precursor to that, we've been
really heavily invested, I think, in AOA
type work across the whole company. So,
people very regularly at the company do
the connection course. We started um
three years ago um with the connection
course at leadership. Then we had um you
at a couple of our leadership off sites
work with the team. So there's a lot of
shared vocabulary. I think our operating
principles um are partially really also
shaped by what I learned um um from AOA
and learned about
>> the mind and human psychology and um um
and neuroscience.
>> Um so there is a shared understanding
shared vocab vocabulary that was always
kind of there. also pre pre-consel there
is you know our
>> CTO and myself we did um groundbreakers
um so that one one week long uh workshop
um so there is that shared vocab
vocabulary really is there
>> now what the council did is it brought
that AOA experience which a lot I think
is very hard to get only by listening to
the podcast and I mean I listened to the
whole thing I think in a week 2x 2x feed
when I first found
But the real change then comes when you
also apply those things in person,
right? When you really add the human
connection
>> element um to that
>> and I think that um with the first
session council which was like a weekend
in person.
>> Yeah.
>> That was really eye opening know to a
lot of people in in leadership that
haven't experienced that and how
efficient this can be.
>> Yeah.
>> And how similar how similar we all are.
Right. Right.
>> And the for me the most beautiful thing
about that is
>> if you just look at the verbatim quotes
that people said throughout that you
know weekend like other people would be
like oh my god that relationship is
broken [laughter]
>> they will never ever get along with each
other ever right
>> and instead everybody felt I don't know
3x more trust like a far far deeper
>> um um like depth of of of relationship
and problem solving um than before. So
>> the converation was amazing to watch you
all at the end of it. It was
>> How was it for you by the way? I mean
>> to be there with you
>> seeing seeing seeing the experiment
because like you know it was
>> so a little bit of a a background on
this is uh we started the council and
Johannes was you know did the math and
he was like this if if I get my team to
do the council that'll be cheaper than
you doing off sites with us
>> can we do this as a team and I hadn't
even conceived of it as a team thing and
I was a little nervous but Johannes
reminded me of my own principles and and
one of them is everything is an
iteration and so I said, "Great." It was
amazing to watch it actually. It was it
was the same principle that you were
talking about earlier, which is there's
a whole bunch of assumptions that you
can't move at a certain speed, but if
you move at a certain speed with a
certain intensity, you can get through a
lot of stuff really, really quickly,
whether that's in a business or whether
that's internally. And so the thing that
I got to see there was you did the same
work that these other councils were that
were groups of leaders who were working
with each other
>> except for you all then
>> work together. So you had this massive
history.
>> Yeah.
>> And you got to see through so much of
your own patterns in a way that the
folks
>> Yes. It took a lot longer for the folks
who who are, you know, just like getting
to know each other in leadership or our
councils or friends, but it's like
working with together. It's like a It's
>> bringing your backpack.
>> Exactly. It was Yeah. And it was also
what was cool about it was to see that
the a afterwards is that you're in a
community of practice in your business,
right? So everybody in your business is
interested in
now who's at least in the management
team is interested in growing as people
and and becoming better people and that
makes for a better business
>> because the more competent our people
get the better our business grows. But
>> but also it helps you retain people.
What that's the other thing that I've
been noticing in your company love you
to talk about it like you're in a place
where retaining great talent is really
really difficult in the space of AI. you
don't seem to have almost any problem
with it. Mhm.
>> What how is the how is that
how is that happening and what are the
other benefits of this kind of cohesion
that so I work with a lot of cos who are
like I I don't care if my team hugs I
don't care if my team is cohesive as
long as they get the job done and
typically what I'll say is
>> give me a winning NBA team that wasn't
cohesive like it like it's part of being
a winning team
>> at least it gives you an advantage
What are some of the advantages you see
in that?
>> I mean the first advantage is that um
that's how I want to live my life. So
I'm
>> I'm working like a lot, right? I invest
a lot of my lifetime and energy into
this into this company. And I think the
um shift that happened for me a couple
of years ago is really to
see building a company as the fastest
way to become the best version of
yourself. And that is not to become, you
know, to be on a leaderboard or
something, but just to really embark on
that journey that ultimately life is
about, right?
And um if that is true
then of course I want to have the people
that I spend a lot a lot a lot a lot of
time every single week um to think
similarly right. So what happened is
that um a core one of my goals for
people that also leave the company is
that they feel that this is you know
their life's work that they do at UNA.
And with that I mean one definitely the
best work that they've ever done. We
want to create an environment where they
can you know really really excel at what
they're doing. Yeah.
>> But second that they feel they
understand themselves more that they're
more empowered that they have more
capacity to show up um than they had
before they joined they joined the
company. And I think that is very very
core both at our operating principles
and how we generally build and lead the
company. And that shows people really
value that because they understand look
this is this is um I can grow as a human
like not only you know the revenue side
which is a which is a function of that.
Yeah,
>> I think almost all of business in a way
is also better understanding yourself
because that allows you to make higher
quality decisions that allows you to
build better relationships with people,
higher trust um um with with people
which allows you to do more things. If
you do not have trust and need to
micromanage everything, you're just also
limited, you know, the amount of things
that you can get done. And I think
people really feel that. Um and it's not
fake. I think the most feedback we get
usually when people read through
operating principles is like huh you
really thought like about them deeply
and throughout the interview process
because they talk with like our head of
people you know the function leader and
so on at the end with myself
that's the thing that they say that is
different that they feel like we're
really authentically living by those
principles and I think that has been an
evolution you know it wasn't there um
immediately but we are now at a point
where I think that that culture is very
very ingrained and um feels true and
right.
>> Yeah. So keeping people advantage better
decisions advantage better culture
advantage people are improving therefore
making better decisions having better
relationships advantage any other
advantages
>> I mean loyalty we spoke about that but
that is that is that is that is implied
I think um it's just alo more enjoyable
like it's also more enjoyable for people
I mean I think the the main thing is
again life is short right like if I'm
spending and dedicating like you my life
to this it better is something that I
enjoy right and I feel alive. I think
that is that is what is very important.
I want people to feel alive because also
for them life is too short right for
candidates as well things go wrong when
>> either the company doesn't know what
they want.
>> Yeah.
>> Or the candidate doesn't know what they
want.
>> Yeah.
>> But if they both know it and then they
are able to articulate it and our best
approximation for that is in our
operating principles. Yeah.
>> Um, which we can give to candidates and
be like, yo, do you like that or not?
>> And if they don't like it, it's great.
There is another place that fits more to
what you authentically, you know, want
ultimately. Um,
>> and yeah, that aliveness I think is very
energizing. So that like creates a very
very vibrant
um energy that people want to be around
with and that is, you know, um, yeah,
has a lot of gravitational pull.
>> Yeah. And so now let's talk about the
operating principles. You've talked
about them a lot. You've mentioned them
a lot. Um, one of the things that you
implied earlier, but you didn't say it
outright, which is to some degree a lot
of your decisions get made based on your
operating principles. Meaning, they're
not really getting made by you. They're
not really getting made by the CTO. It's
we make our decisions based on these
operating principles.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, so tell me about your evolution.
Like it started with a skateboard.
[laughter]
And then it and then it it's it's weird
where it is today. Just tell me about
why you wanted operating principles. You
you started with them before me. Yep.
>> And then how they've evolved. And one of
the things that you that I think people
don't get is if you're if you're really
if you're really living by your
operating principles, they will change.
>> They have to change. Exactly. Exactly.
Yeah. So go ahead and tell us about the
evolution of of living with and your
operating principles. I mean at first I
think we we we announced them I don't
know was it like roughly six months um
before we met the first time and the
reason we did is like we're in a phase
of growth and um I read it in a book
[laughter]
you know like you should have your we
back then still called them values you
know like have your company values and
they actually were not bad like some of
them you know we've we've we've taken um
with us already then it was a function
of hey what do we as people also value
so one example that is still with us is
like students of the game. So being like
very very curious having that sense of
wonder being that like learning learning
machine um that remained remained with
us. So we came up with a with a first
set, iterated on that um in leadership,
announced that to the company.
Then um I met yourself and we embarked
on the you know AOA journey and then I
think with back then we raised 25
million. We got like kind of preempted.
Everything looked amazing on the outset.
Large banks were using our product. We
had our self-hosted um offering out
there. So from the outside everything
looked really really good but we also
started limit we started challenging our
limiting beliefs and assumptions and I
think when I think about also myself
back then I was a bit more
I'm still eager and very motivated but I
think I was a bit too narrow-minded like
when I was like this is what I do let's
go do it do it do it not looking at all
the data points available and I think
the work with you really um helped me to
challenge a lot of those core
assumptions. Hey, is this actually like
you know is this actually right? So we
did that a lot also within the
leadership team um of the connection
course and everything and then
understood that
ultimately we are here to play to win
but the product architecture we have
created creates so much friction both
for our customers long term and for our
own internal development velocity. So
how fast we can ship product that we
have to change something and then within
a couple of uh months we um yeah decided
to um completely change our product
architecture how we package um um the
the the software and that we had to
because of that we had to lay off uh 30%
of the company.
>> Yeah.
>> In January 2023.
>> Yeah. that that decision was made at my
first company offsite with you if I
recall correctly. Yeah.
>> I mean the not the decision to lay off
but the decision to play to win so to
change the architecture and then we were
still a bit avoidant to fully
>> lean into the what that then ultimately
>> means for the business. So that took a
couple of I I remember I read the
article like Cain from Howard Marx who
described and what you know the changing
interest rate environment means for
boardroom dynamics and even company
culture.
>> Um but that was also like happening
happening back then. So um and that made
us to ultimately then like really you
know understand okay like we have we
have to do this this is the right thing
>> for the business
>> and writing that email which is by the
way public um and we spoke a lot about
that because you said this will be the
most important email that you will write
>> to your team which it also is and one
thing I repeat a lot also when with with
with my reports right now is you told me
to write this email in a way
of how an empowered like fully empowered
person would look at that because you
know like 30% of the company is like a
lot people rely on you they trust in you
know they trust you and you make that
decision in a way you know yeah like you
feel or I felt like a lot of shame and
guilt as well
>> as part of that
>> and um going through that though and
communicating through that has really
really shaped a lot of our culture. So
back then we had there was too much of
>> would say like toxic niceness in a way
in the company. So walking on eggshells
you know not wanting to talk about the
hard thing money was so free and cheap
you know before of that coming out of
co. So there was a lot of it just like
you know works
>> and we had a lot of that walking on
eggshells in our culture. Yeah.
>> So out of that very very difficult
decision came the operating principle of
um open the draw which is about
embracing transparency and embracing
um embracing also intensity ultimately
and the analogy here is which I think I
stole actually from one of your podcasts
and then you stole it
>> and then I stole it back from you.
>> You stole it back from me.
>> Yeah. um was that um in every apartment
there is a drawer where you just put all
the stuff into it that you do not want
to look at. Right? It's like keeping it
keeping it keeping it away from myself.
And our job as a company is to go to
that drawer, open it, and bring clarity
into the messiness of that drawer, which
is an analogy for like conflict,
difficult, you know, um decisions, fear,
emotions. you're avoiding and so on. So
I think that based on that very you know
like tough decision that really was
something that came out of that which
has um shaped our culture and then
>> yeah it's such [clears throat] a good
one. I remember we switched our we had
embrace intensity we switched it to open
the drawer and one of the reasons we did
it was because I was watching one of
your meetings and someone's like I got
to open the drawer on that and it was
just it had become such a
regular part of your culture for someone
to say it and everybody immediately knew
what it was everybody could immediately
prepare themselves to have the real
conversation
>> and so it's one of the reasons that we
brought it into our company that
phrasing which Yeah. So
>> I think it's very powerful. So we try to
um phrase all of them in a way that
people can say them. So raise the bar,
open the drawer, ask what's etc. So that
people can, you know, use it in their
dayto-day.
>> Yeah.
>> And I mean open the drawer by now is
probably one of the most [laughter]
used sentences in the company because it
it allows people to do also that it's
like hey let me open the drawer with you
on that. It kind of gives like
permission to have those conversations.
>> Yeah. Another one that we iterated on
was before that it was um the the we had
a principle that was called like we not
me.
>> Yeah.
>> Which was which was about you know like
um yeah always kind of put the company
first. It's said like ego is not
important um or not helpful where there
is some truth to it.
But what it also
did was that people did not show up
fully empowered because yes, it's also
about yourself. It's not only about
others. It's like about yourself. It's
about having endto-end ownership of
things like really really
>> you know driving those um results and
thinking also what you want as a person.
>> Yeah.
>> Um and um and say that. So we changed
that and iterated that to connect
connect which keeps the you know
connection part both with our customers
and similarly um connecting
>> with um each other but also we spoke
about that previously connecting with
yourself. I mean, I think that's the
whole the whole thing. If you really
really understand yourself, you will
just be way more effective in
everything. And that applies to the CEO,
that applies to leadership, that applies
to everybody every every person even I
mean outside of companies.
>> So, what made you want to become a CEO?
Not a not a choice everybody wants.
I think at the core of it is um that I
fall in love with the CEO and found a
job when I really understood that this
is the fastest way to grow me and myself
as a person. I don't think there is
another job that
confronts you with that frequency with
problems such as your bank doesn't exist
from one day um to the other. You have
to make the call to ultimately lay off
30%
of people
>> that you know really put a lot of trust
in yourself. How do you communicate
that? I think those things bring up so
much about also who you are.
>> Yeah.
>> As a person that I'm very grateful for
the role and the job because I believe
it's yeah the fastest way for myself to
ultimately become a better version of
myself.
>> What's the story that made you
interested in
becoming a better version of you? Tell
me about like how that formed in your
system. I think when I was um so I grew
up in Germany, very academic household,
small city in Bavaria, like constrained,
not fully freeth thinking, independently
thinking environment.
And um when I was 16, I read a book um
from a Harvard psychologist around like
a growth mindset, a very American way of
saying things, but it really like hooked
me. And it instilled that feeling into
me that whatever I want to do, I can do
and um that ultimately I'm on a journey
to become the best version um of myself.
And I think that always stayed with me.
So after I did my um computer science um
degree, I went to a Bipasana retreat in
Myanmar um for 11 days um continuing to
open my aperture and learning different
things.
>> Yeah. And that now went from only
becoming or wanting to become the best
version of myself
became now to to a point where I really
want to build a company where other
people join and after they left they
feel that they have more capacity or
more empowered better understand
themselves and also become a better
version of themselves. Yeah, it's funny
how that works because my experience is
anybody who is really interested in a
I'm going to truly understand myself
>> better version of themselves. Anybody
who goes down that eventually lands in
the same place which is
>> part of me becoming the version of
myself that is deeply aligned that is
who I want to be is is contributing to
other people also becoming better
versions of themselves. And in a way
building a company is you know in a way
like growing a child that is growing up
and um if you are in deep authentic
alignment with your own principles and
the company's principles I think it's a
lot of fun. It's very invigorating and
it um really helps you um a lot to grow.
>> Yeah. So many people don't see it as fun
but see it as overwhelming. So then
we'll but we'll get to
>> that. I mean that is also part of that
but that's that's part of the growth
journey, right? It is. Yeah.
>> So tell me a little bit about what's
been the journey of what was GitPod
which is now ONA.
>> So the purpose of the company is really
to multiply human potential in a world
that is defined by software and
concretely that for us means that we
want to build the future of software
engineering. And as that future became
very apparently linked very closely to
AI, we internally discussed and said
look if this is all true what the folks
are saying and agents will be at one
point able to take a task and write
software similar in a similar fashion as
humans can do. We should be prepared for
that moment. And at that point I think
um the first thing that we did is we
just um got along um it's like a one
month road trip in a way to just learn
and be very curious and very quickly it
became clear to us that the impact AI
will have on our business and on the
core experience and the value that we
can deliver to our customers um will be
very very high and at that point we
internally made the decision all right
we will go allin I mean it took like
six, seven months to get everybody um
behind that include customers on that
journey as AI is really shifting and
disrupting what the role of a software
engineer means and the workflow behind
that it's a big big shift and there is
quite some um would say identity crisis
with a lot of software engineers.
>> Yeah. Um, as that shift is happening, we
want to make that transition from being
a software engineer to being a software
conductor where you're not like writing
and crafting every single line of code
when you're orchestrating different
workflows. We want to make that
transition as enjoyable, as exciting,
and as fun as possible for all um
software engineers um out there. So you
have a guy in revenue who's like, "I'm
selling one thing, now you're going to
ask me to sell another." You have a CTO
who's built one thing, just built a
really beautiful version of that thing,
and now we got to change. It was a
massive
>> Yeah.
>> switch.
>> You're building prototypes literally two
or three months after like the first
decision to explore is made. Yeah.
>> You're selling product month or two
after that. Like just massive change
very quickly. Yeah.
>> How do you have those conversations with
people who were thinking they were
heading to
Georgia, so to speak, and now they're
heading to California.
>> Yeah.
One caveat there is that it is a very
logical evolution of the product. So, it
wasn't like a hard pivot. It was more
using the primitives we have built and
kind of repositioning them um in a bit
in order to create more value. So I
think that is that is important because
that was the reason why we could take
our customers on that journey and we
have I mean our customers include the
oldest bank of the United States, the
bank of New York, largest alternative
asset managers, largest pharma companies
there more than two million developers
on the platform. So big big
organizations trust us. So it was always
important that this is not like a pivot
but an evolution.
>> Yeah. Um the core decision making then
ultimately I believe is and was rooted
in a deep level of trust that we have
both in leadership and with the rest of
the company. So um you famously told me
you need to get two things right in
building a company which is building
great relationships and making great
decisions. If you get those two things
right you will be successful. And I
think over the last three years we
invested a lot in estab in establishing
that very authentic trust within the
company. Um and that allowed us to bring
all data points to the table to then
make a decision based on all available
data points. And I think we have a very
high level of comfort to live in
discomfort.
>> And and how did you build that trust?
like when I saw what happened in your
organization, you sat down, had some
very hard conversations, living by the
principle that you call open the drawer
and had some very very difficult
conversations that people were not
particularly happy or unhappy with, but
they were they were in it. They were in
the debate with you and then
seamlessly almost after those
conversations were had, consensus was
built. It's not even consensus. It was
alignment was built and boom, you you
all were off to the races.
>> And when I think about it, I was just in
in another company recently
>> and I was telling them alignment always
beats
effort. Meaning like if you have a
>> a bicycle and you're doing the tour to
France and you have the best bicyclist
on a cruiser single speed with the
wheels wobbly and the chain loose,
>> they're never going to beat an average
biker on a completely aligned
>> 15speed, 18-speed, whatever it is these
days
>> vehicle, right? And so you you created
that alignment just incredibly quickly.
um how did you build the trust and how
do how I know that the conversations are
there there's debate in the
conversations but what I know about the
way you work is it's very not top down
it's not you're not just telling them
this is what we're doing so how does the
decision get made and
>> and how does that work
>> really everything is ultimately rooted
in the principles and I think over the
last three years specifically after
working very closely with you and the
team we developed
in a way a deep resilience in our
culture and are embracing change in a
way where we don't look at it from a
perspective of overwhelm but more from a
perspective of okay hey there is tension
let's run towards that tension
>> throughout the whole throughout the
whole um organization and that tension
can be in interpersonal relationships
within the company that tension can be
with the product architecture that
tension can also be in relationships
with a customer but whenever ever we
feel that friction we kind of
immediately run towards that. So that is
I think very deeply rooted in and
learned also as part of the as part of
the culture. So the
>> might sound um it might sound a bit um I
don't know not real because we kind of
renamed the company and it's like people
feel ah that's like a drastic decision
but in a way it felt very very very
natural to us. they were actually harder
decisions [laughter] we had to we had to
make we had to make um we had to make in
the past and um again I think number one
is um trust and trust also stems from
transparency. So for example, our board
packs, so the the the the information we
write for our board meetings, we share
with the rest of the company. Our big
decisions and we had a couple of them
throughout the years and we write what
we call RFC's. So request for comments
where there is a clear problem statement
is I think another thing we refined over
the over the years together with with
you and the AOA team and then talk about
um success criteria. So what does a good
solution look like you know to that um
problem and then speak about the
proposed solution as well and we take
that as a basis often times a written
basis where people then can talk um um
about and leave comments and um add
their data points it's still clear
ultimately somebody has to make the
decision I think that is also very very
important because often times you do not
want to make want to have decisions by
committee I think that slows you down so
it needs to be very clear who ultimately
owns the decision and on that case it
was me and for I mean it's it's kind of
a one-way door decision. We are not
renaming the company again, right? Um so
I had to make the decision but everybody
felt hurt because they were able to add
the data points
>> to the table.
>> So that that so you just named three of
the things that I think are beautiful
like running towards the friction.
>> Yeah.
>> Which I would say builds trust but is
your second thing which is builds trust.
My experience is that if a team can go
into difficulty and then come out
feeling like they're better people or
they've made a better decision, trust
gets built
>> 100%
>> trust and then transparency that like
those three things are
>> exactly how I see you move in the world
and what allows this this uh transition
the transitions many transitions very
quickly in the company and the culture
to stay aligned in these massive
transitions.
>> Yeah. [snorts] which is amazing and so
but what I if I'm listening to this and
I have no idea what we're talking about
I the first question what do you mean
running towards friction before during
and after
>> so let's start with the the the business
logic and rational um on the business
side there is a really good quote from
one of the um Spotify founders who says
the value of your company is the sum of
the complexity of all problems solved
[laughter] and I think there is a a lot
a lot of truth in that. So the
>> the bigger the problem, the more meaty
the problem, if you solve those things,
there is a lot of value, right? And the
biggest problems are usually where you
feel the largest amount of tension of
friction, right? Um and that stands in
between efficiency and the simplest like
logical argument for me always was if
there is for example interpersonal
conflict in the leadership team you know
usually that's like product engineering
and sales sometimes and there should be
there is always I mean some natural
friction that you want to have there but
if they stop in a way talking to each
other if they stop thinking that they
can add all relevant data points in
order to move the whole thing forward.
Um they limit the amount of data that
ultimately you as an organ organization
require to make the optimal decision.
>> So I think um for me it's just if you if
you're avoiding if you're avoiding
tension, if you're avoiding your fears,
if you're avoiding conflict in your
organization, you're limiting the amount
of data points that can help you make a
better decision as an organization. So,
one of the things that you've done
really well is you've made
you've made the principles
known for most companies. It's like if I
went around the company, nobody could
tell you what they are.
>> Y
>> I go around your company, everybody
knows, everybody knows what the
operating principles are.
>> So, two-part question. First part is
how'd you do that? Second part is most
CEOs think that's not a good investment.
Mhm.
>> They say, "Oh, I have to spend all that
time to to like sell these principles to
some degree. I want you to tell me about
the ROI as far as how much time did it
actually take you and how much time has
it actually saved you?" Like so ROI as
far as time with operating principles.
>> Yeah, I think first one again is that
this is what I want in life. So the
operating principles um are in a way
also how I live my relationship with my
fiance. They are how I you know build
relationships with my friends. They are
very very much related to what I want to
have you know out of out of out of life
which I think is very very important and
that again not only applies to to to a
founder or CEO but also from a
leadership perspective. If your
alignment is not strong with the
principles of the company, there will be
too much friction and again life is too
short, right? There will be other places
where you can be more in alignment with
what is important um to you.
>> Generally, they are aligned a lot with a
couple of the you know, AOA principles
because this has really also shaped you
know my my life both um professional and
personal.
>> Um so I wouldn't say that the process
was you know endless. It was like you
know very very natural like big moments
in the company's history
>> where it was for me also a way to
communicate to the company. So when we
did the layoffs for example I spoke a
lot about embracing intensity.
>> Yeah.
>> As a way to like get people also in that
you know in that mindset and thought a
lot about okay how do you actually you
know communicate how do you lead through
that. So they've become very very
helpful as part of that and became um
and we shaped them also be you know
because of those things. So they they
they evolved and time saving wise. So
with recruitment big time and with
making also decisions when things are
not working out
>> with with with employees as well. So
after we hired them big time we have a
process which we call quarterly touch
basis. So we're um you have uh very you
open the drawer.
>> Yeah.
>> You open [snorts] the drawer with your
with your with your manager and um
they're also fully guided by the
operating principles. We had a culture
that was um very very documentationheavy
initially because you followed a bit
what GitLab
>> was was doing and that
>> led to a lot of also outdated
documentation. So we kind of had this
very prescriptive you know Slack
guidelines and you know all of those
things.
>> Yeah. And ultimately when I think about
a lot of those things right now it just
should be the operating principles. They
are the essence
>> of decision making. So why do I need to
have those hundreds of documents when I
can just like codify
>> you know culture which is how to build
relationships and how to make great
decisions in those in that set of
principles. So there is a lot a lot a
lot of efficiency
>> um that we gained. Yeah, that's the
thing that I think people don't quite
gro both in personal life and in
business. If you have a good set of
operating principles, 80% of your
decisions get made almost automatically.
>> Yeah.
>> And they get made well consistently.
>> It's just an amazing efficiency for
probably
>> I mean focus time on operating
principles. Would you say 40 hours every
two years? What would you say just
generally? I mean we have kind of a
recap at every um offsite which happens
um twice a year.
>> Yeah.
>> At the as part of the leadership offsite
but right now they're very stable.
>> Yeah.
>> So that you know for for a couple of
offsides we always did that you know
iteration process looked at them again
but right now they feel very very
natural and I think
>> part of that is that we you know each as
people have grown we've seen like a
couple of things as a company. So
they're quite like stable right now.
they will for sure, you know, evolve,
but I think the foundation is very
>> um true.
>> That's the thing that I think people
also don't get about operating
principles is that it's like a lot like
training a dog.
>> Yeah.
>> If you don't spend the time up, it's a
lot of time up front, but if you do it,
the rest of your dog's life is a lot
easier.
>> Yeah.
>> But there is upfront cost to it.
>> And you push down also decision- making
um in a more decentralized fashion to
the company, right? It's like my life is
way easier because of that as well, you
know. I mean, still get frustrated from
time to time, of course, [laughter]
but um but um usually, you know, people
are really aligned with those with those
with those principles.
>> Yeah.
>> Cool. Johannes, that was a great
conversation. So good to have you here.
>> Thank you.
>> Yeah. Thanks for being here.
>> After three years, I made it on the
podcast. [laughter]
Can cross off one thing from my bucket
list now.
And uh yeah, I hope to have you back to
where we can find out what's happened to
to to your company and and how the
culture is progressing. That'd be great.
>> Very grateful for the work that you do
and the whole team.
>> I feel
>> incredibly fortunate that we get to work
together.
>> Me, too.
>> Looking forward to the next three years.
>> Thanks for joining us and it was great
to have you here, Johannes. And uh we're
going to put in the show notes the ONA
operating principles if that's okay. And
>> we are also in the leadership
newsletter, we'll send out that email
that Johannes talked about. Uh that was
that very difficult defining email for
him as well as we're going to give you a
link to join the council if you're
interested in that. Uh so anything else
that you need hopefully it's in the show
notes. This podcast is co-hosted by Joe
Hudson and Brett Kistler and it is
produced by Mie Kelly. Thank you very
much. Please subscribe and have a great
day.
[music]
>> I'm scared to pronounce your last name.
>> Lraf.
>> Long long.
>> L You can also say LR.
>> Long graph. Long long graph.
>> Long graph. Yeah.
>> Long graph. Okay. [snorts]
>> Um and I am
>> Yeah. [laughter]
>> Long graph. Yeah.
>> Only one I know is
that's it. That's all. That's the only
German my mom ever said to me.
[laughter]
>> Can we Can we please have that in the
podcast?
>> Put that as an [laughter]
>> It means you're a dumb donkey. Dumbass.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
I we should talk we should talk more jam